---
title: "Your skin's invisible armour: can fats prevent eczema?"
date: 2026-07-01
permalink: /posts/2026/07/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - eczema
  - skin lipids
  - atopic dermatitis
---


*When you hear of the term "lipids (fats)", what is the first thing that comes into your mind? It might be diet (food intake) or blood lipid tests (e.g. cholesterol). 
But that's not the lipids (fats) that I want to focus on here.* I want to talk about the **skin fats**, the invisible armour of our skin.

**In our skin, there is a vital layer of fats.** 
These fats are like an invisible armour that protects us from the external hazards, such as pollens, pollutants, or germs etc.,
They also stop water from leaving our skin, and that's very important. 
You might feel that you have rarely heard of skin fats, but actually, you have already encountered "artificial skin fats" daily. 
For a long time, we have relied on thick creams/ moisturiser  for smoothing our skin or controlling eczema, and that's basically trying to use an external product to mimic our skin's natural fats
and that's the reason why sometimes after you apply creams, your skin feels better and less dry!

## So fats in the skin are important, but..?
Now you know that skin fats have an important role in the maintain the skin's function. 
But, unfortunately, **we have not got to a point where we could use a cream to "prevent" eczema from happening.**
Prevent eczema means that stopping healthy skin from changing to eczema skin (red itchy skin). 
Preventing eczema is important because if we could prevent eczema, a lot of people would not have to experience the itchy discomforts that eczema caused and also saved lots of money in medical treatments as well.

## Why haven't we found an effective cream to prevent eczema?
One reason is that our skin is not made of a single generic "fat", but lots of fats that work together in ways that we do not fully understand the skin yet.
The skin is incredibly complex; it is a highly specific recipe made up of thousands of unique different fats (different lipid species).
We are still on our way to finding out which specific fats or a combination of different fats is the most important for building a strong armour that can stop eczema from happening.
Until we can decode that precise lipid recipe and understand exactly what goes missing right before eczema happens, our creams will mostly remain a temporary bandage rather than a preventative cure.

## My PhD work is helping to solve this mystery
Hopefully, one day, we will find the solution to prevent eczema, and I am on the way to solve this! 
In my work, I focus extensively on how skin fats influence the risk of developing eczema, and feel free to watch this media to have a glimpse of one of my work: [Media Channel 9](https://www.nine.com.au/australia-news/videos/natural-fats-in-babies-skin-can-help-predict-if-theyll-develop-eczema-study-shows/cm8fidgrp00040ho9n89aw3dm) 





