---
title: 'About UMAP'
date: 2026-07-07
permalink: /posts/2026/07/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - bioinformatics
  - lipidomics
---

## Why skin lipid (fat) profiles? 
In one of my work, I used UMAP to identify potential lipid profiles within the skin.  That is, I am looking at the lipid composition within the skin altogether at once.
Why? Because there are so many lipid species in the skin (in my case: there are **176** different skin lipid species!) .
I could chose to look at each of them individually, but did you know that although these lipid species are not identical, behind the scenes, their synthesis overlap, so they are closely connected with each other, and they work together to maintain the skin barrier function?

If we look at each lipid species individually, we may miss the link between different lipid species and the whole picture of the skin barrier. 
To take into consideration natural of the skin lipids,  I chose to focus on skin lipid **profiles** instead of individual skin lipid **species**.

Still finding the concept of **profiles** abstract? Keep on reading :)

*Now let's stop thinking of the skin a bit, but instead let's think of a juice you get at the juice stand*

You go to a juice store, look at the menu, and there are different juice. These different juice will have contain different mixed of fruits/ veggies, and the amount of each ingredient differ between different drinks. We can think of profiles like different mix of juices. 

## Why bother looking at profiles when we could just look at each ingredient (lipids) seperately?

Here is why we need to look at "profiles" (clusters of ingredients) rather than analysing every single ingredient individually.

### Ingredients Work Together (Synergy)
Imagine you are judging a juice and you only measure one variable: the amount of ginger. If you find a massive spike of ginger, you might conclude that the drink will be spicy, undrinkably sour and bitter.

However, you are missing the context. If that massive spike of ginger is accompanied by high levels of orange, carrot it is actually a perfectly balanced, sweet immunity shot. By looking at the profile (the combination of ingredients) rather than the individual ingredient, you understand how they interact. In research, biological markers don't act alone; their combined profile tells the real story.

### Avoiding Information Overload (Redundancy)
Suppose a juice contains orange, citrus,  carrot, ginger, tumeric. If you analyse each of these individually, you are running four different tests just to figure out that the drink boost immunity.

These ingredients are highly correlated—they essentially do the same job. Instead of getting bogged down by testing every single ingredients independently, grouping them into a single "Immune booster Profile" simplifies your data and reduces noise without losing any meaningful information.

### Identifying the True "Phenotype"
If I hand you a list of 20 individual ingredients and their exact milligram measurements, it takes a lot of mental effort to figure out what you are drinking.

But if we use an algorithm to group those ingredients into profiles, we can instantly categorize the drinks into distinct groups:

- The "Citrus Detox" profile

- The "Berry Antioxidant" profile

- The "Green Energy" profile

In a clinical setting, profiling does exactly this. Instead of staring at more than hundred of individual variables, we identify the overarching "recipe." 
This allows you to say, "Indivudals with this specific lipid profile are at a higher risk," which is a far more powerful and predictive conclusion than looking at a single drop of lemon juice.

## So, how can we identify profiles? From individual ingredient to profiling, we need UMAP
UMAP sound like a abstract and complicated methods, but the core idea is actually quite intuitive.
It's basically a way of achieving the points above- where we reduce the complexity of the data but also find the potential lipid profiles!
Of course, there are factors that changes the output of the UMAP 2D plot, and I won't go into details here.

## Here are some helpful resources for further understanding UMAP: 
1. [Understanding UMAP using animation](https://pair-code.github.io/understanding-umap/index.html).
2. [UMAP Wolly Mammoth example](https://www.maxnoichl.eu/projects/mammoth/)
3. [Documentation of UMAP](https://umap-learn.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)

*Post written with Gemini's help, but juice idea was original. Hope you enjoy the post!*
